---
layout: page
title: Bio
---

<p align="center">
  <img src="/assets/img/profLeake.jpg" />
</p>
<center>Professor Mark Leake, FInstP, FRMS, FRSB</center>
<center>mark.leake@york.ac.uk</center>

**Mark Leake** is a physicist by training, addressing challenging biophysical and
biochemical questions in a range of biological processes. Following initial
‘natsci’ studies in the University of Cambridge, he gained his biophysics PhD
on muscle proteins using optical tweezers in King’s College London, later
postdoctoral positions in Oxford and Heidelberg. He gained independence as a
Royal Society URF in Oxford, leading research in single-molecule biophysics,
prior to becoming Anniversary Chair of Biological Physics at the University of
York and Director-Founder of the Biological Physical Sciences Institute in 2013
and Coordinator of the Physics of Life Group in 2019, a biophysics collective
of ~10 research teams.  His research involves (i) developing new biophysical
instrumentation for addressing open biological questions; (ii) coupling these
to molecular biology/biochemistry to investigate single biomolecules under
physiologically relevant environments. He has developed a cluster of
biophysical techniques enabling imaging and manipulation of single molecules
with extraordinary control. This scientific success is founded on
single-molecule fluorescence microscopy with molecular and cellular
manipulation and precision microfluidics technology. He is in an ideal position
to step from single molecules to investigating complex processes at higher
length scales of cells and tissues. His work has added insight into the
behaviour of the flagellar motor of bacteria, DNA replication, repair and
remodelling, protein transport, oxidative phosphorylation, and signal
transduction and gene regulation, underpinned by innovative tools enabling
robust quantification of molecular and cellular properties: spatiotemporal
dynamics of functional molecular machines, their architectures, mechanics and
functional interactions
* DNA replication, remodelling and repair: elucidating kinetics of turnover,
  recruitment and assembly of replication/remodelling/repair machinery in
  bacteria models for those in higher organisms.

* Signal transduction/gene regulation: using model yeast to study how chemical
  signals at cell membranes are converted to gene regulation in eukaryotic
  nuclei, and how cells retain memory through epigenetics.

* DNA topology: investigating crucial effects of shape on roles of DNA in the
  cell, including its interactions with binding partners and the activity
  status of genes, and molecular machines that manipulate DNA shape.

* Membrane trafficking: investigating how key biomolecules are trafficked
  through the cell and get deposited into membranes and ultimately recycled.

* Biomedical physics: investigating a range of human diseases including cancer,
  and infection and antibiotic resistance using innovative biophysical
  technologies.

* Biomolecular liquid condensates: probing a range of crucial liquid-liquid
  phase separation behaviour technologies in fundamental biological processes.

Leake’s work on molecular manipulation, ultrasensitive imaging and bespoke
instrumentation has led to >150 articles, >15 papers cited over 100 times, several
thousand cumulative citations, with a personal h-index of >40. He is an elected
Fellow of the Institute of Physics, Royal Microscopical Society, and Royal
Society of Biology, and an editor for Nature Publishing Group and Royal Society
journals.  He is sole-author of textbooks Single-molecule cellular biophysics
(Cambridge University Press 2013), Biophysics: Tools & Techniques (CRC Press
2016), and Editor of Chromosome Architecture Methods in Molecular Biology,
Biophysics of Infection Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, and
Single molecule cellular biophysics in the Royal Society’s flagship biology
journal Phil Trans B. His core work ethic is underpinned by a rich sense of
collegiality, dedicated to the pursuit of the highest standards of scholarship,
academic collaboration, and inspirational teaching, and he aims to invigorate
all who study, research and work with him.


